---
date: 2021-01-23T11:42:09Z
title: India's Plastic Problem
author: ''
hero_image: "/content/images/the-great-plastic-wave-2020-squarergb.jpg"

---
Artwork credits: [Nic Mac](https://www.nicmacillustration.com/thegreatplasticwave)

The following essay is one I wrote during my International Relations course in university. It examines India’s plastic waste problem through the lenses of realist and post-colonial theories.

Up until 1947, India was a British colony. 73 years later, it is a rising global power, with a population of about 1.3 billion (Trading Economics, 2020). Its rapid population growth, along with globalisation and industrialisation, has led to many problems, such as urbanisation, increasing consumption and, therefore, increasing waste production. Plastic has become an important aspect of 21st century life - it is cheap, durable and can replace heavier materials in packaging, construction, and consumer goods. However, these exact properties also make plastic difficult to recycle, impossible to naturally decompose in soil and harmful to burn/incinerate. This has detrimental effects on the environment and human health. India’s plastic consumption has increased exponentially: by 890% from 1990 to 2014 (Banerjee et al., 2014). Although India has a surprisingly high recycling rate of an estimated 47% (Mutha et al., 2005), the other methods used (incineration and landfilling) are inefficient. Tonnes of undisposed plastic waste block rivers, litter India’s streets and create man-made waste mountains.

On top of the large amount of plastic pollution from the domestic production and mismanagement of plastics, India has been importing plastic (and other) waste from developed countries for decades. The trend of waste export among Western developed nations largely came about in the 80s, when those countries experienced increasing environmental, labour and health regulations that made the disposal of waste on their own land much more expensive (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019). Sending waste to developing nations, which were eager to increase foreign exchange earnings and had very weak environmental regulations, became a cheap and attractive alternative. The negative effects of this on developing nations, who did not have the technology and infrastructure to properly segregate, recycle and dispose of the waste, came to light and led to the adoption of the Basel Convention in 1992 (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019). The Basel Convention set out rules and conditions under which the transboundary movement of waste can take place. Two important conditions are that hazardous waste export should only take place with the “prior informed consent” of the importing country, and so long as it does not “pose a danger to human health and the environment” (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019). However, because plastic did not count as a hazardous waste until 2019, Western countries were able to ship it without fulfilling those conditions. Due to this and many more faults, the Basel Convention is heavily criticised for being ineffective and unenforceable (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019). It does not account for the power imbalances between waste exporting and importing countries, and does not count many types of waste as hazardous. Furthermore, many exporting countries, such as the USA, never ratified the Convention in the first place, instead opting to make bilateral agreements so as to avoid adhering to the rules of the Convention. Through the transport of waste to developing nations, negative externalities - pollution, costs and health impacts - are also moved from Western countries to developing nations like India.

**Realism**

As one of the oldest International Relations theories, realism is focused on power, security and competition. It consists of three core elements: statism, survival and self-help. Statism refers to the idea that states are the principal agents in international politics and have legitimacy through the representation of the collective will of their populations, which enable it to exercise authority within its borders (Baylis et al., 2014). Survival is the idea that in the anarchic international system, state leaders must ensure their nation’s interests as a priority, and that in order to do this, (military) power is important. Self-help refers to the fact that states cannot depend on others for their survival and must ensure their own wellbeing (Baylis et al., 2014).

As well as increased pollution; population growth, urbanisation, industrialisation and globalisation lead to economic development. Realists would argue that in order to ensure India’s survival, it must gain power. In the international system we live in today, economic power is of utmost importance, hence India should do all it can to develop economically, to improve conditions at home and gain more leverage in international negotiations. Though there have been developments in the accessibility and use of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power, burning coal has remained to be the most cost- and output- efficient. Plastic remains the cheapest, most durable and therefore most attractive material for packaging, building and consumer products. In their industrialisation processes that lead them to the powerful positions they hold today, Western nations used unsustainable energy and plastic. Why, then, should developing nations like India prioritise the environment rather than their own people? The destruction of the environment has been brought on by developed nations, whose people enjoy lavish lifestyles and living standards much higher than those in India due to nonrenewable energy and plastic. It is therefore the responsibility of those states to compromise their high quality of life to better the projected climate changes. India, which was not part of the problem to begin with, can first develop by any means possible to reach the quality and standards of living of European states. After that, it should be concerned with securing a global public good - a stable and clean environment.

**Postcolonialism**

Postcolonialism is a relatively new line of thought in International Relations, developed in the late 20th century. It examines the historical relations of colonies and colonising powers, from the perspectives of the daily lives of colonised people. Fanon, a political philosopher, highlighted the desire in new states to imitate European ideals, and called for less dependence on former colonising powers through an independent national identity. Postcolonialism focuses on the discourse used in International Relations and other literature, and the effect that it has in justifying the actions of colonisers and subordinating former colonies. It concentrates on globalisation, which is defined (by the BBC) as “the increasing interconnectedness of the world through an increasing trade and cultural exchange across borders”. The term “postcolonialism” is used in this paper instead of “post-colonialism”, as the unhyphenated version describes continuities of colonialism (Baylis et al., 2014) rather than merely describing an era after colonisation.

As described in the second part of the introduction, India is a major importer of plastic waste. Postcolonialist thinkers would argue that this is a form “waste colonialism”:

Waste exporting countries, such as Germany and the UK, justify their plastic waste export by saying that they are increasing employment opportunities in India and sending potential materials for further use. This is an example of the use of discourse to justify colonial actions. India’s appetite for foreign exchange earning could also be viewed as a way of acceptance of subordination.

An important function of colonialism is access to land (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019); the export of plastic waste, the pollution and other externalities that come with its disposal is an indirect access to land, further showing that waste export is continuity of colonialism. After China announced their ban on import of solid wastes in August 2017, the UK claimed that Western nations like themselves should take responsibility for their own waste and deal with it at home, but also listed India, among other Asian countries, as a “temporary” alternative export country. India is one of the top destinations for waste import, and its imports “more than quadrupled” after China’s ban (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019). Many Western countries do not have long term plans for waste management within their own borders (Sridhar and Kumar, 2019).

Further, the fact that the import of plastic did not require India’s prior informed consent exhibits the major power imbalance still persistent in the post-colonial era: if a country does not need to give consent to being swamped by the waste of others, it has clearly not been able to gain much leverage in the international realm. The terms of waste trade also violate the condition of “as long as there is no danger to health and the environment”. This is because most international organisations, including the Basel Convention, are still dominated by Western countries and colonial power relations play a large role in them. Countries like India often have no choice but to comply with the rules laid out to them.

Bibliography:

Banerjee, T., Srivastava, R. and Hung, Y., (2014), “Plastics Waste Management in India: An Integrated Solid Waste Approach”, _Handbook of Environmental and Waste Management Vol 2._

BBC, “Globalisation” Retrieved November 16th from [https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zxpn2p3/revision/1](https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zxpn2p3/revision/1 "https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zxpn2p3/revision/1")

Baylis, J., Smith, S., and Owens, P., (2014). “The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations”, 6th Revised Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sridhar, L. and Kumar, P., (2019), “The New Face of Waste Colonialism: A Review of Legal Regulations Governing the Import of Waste into India”, _15 Socio-Legal Rev_. 101.

Mutha, N., Patel, M., and Premnath, V., (2005) “Plastics Materials Flow Analysis for India”, _Resources, Conservation and Recycling,_ 47 (2006) 222–244

Nazeer, M., Tabassum, U., and Alam, S. (2016), “Environmental Pollution and Sustainable Development in Developing Countries”, _The Pakistan Development Review,_ _55_(4), 589-604

Trading Economics (2020), ‘India population’ Retrieved November 16th from [https://tradingeconomics.com/india/population#:\~:text=Population%20in%20India%20is%20expected,according%20to%20our%20econometric%20models](https://tradingeconomics.com/india/population#:\~:text=Population%20in%20India%20is%20expected,according%20to%20our%20econometric%20models "https://tradingeconomics.com/india/population#:~:text=Population%20in%20India%20is%20expected,according%20to%20our%20econometric%20models")